# ExpoSeq's Data Structure

In the beginning you will always start to process your data using Mixcr. You can do that locally by using the *PlotManager* or you can create a jobscript for a server by using [mixcr_cl.py](mixcr_cl.py). For both ways the pipeline generates a file structure which looks like the following:

```
📦my_experiments
 ┣ 📂your_experiment_name
 ┃ ┣ 📂alignment_reports
 ┃ ┣ 📂assembly_reports
 ┃ ┣ 📂clones_result
 ┃ ┗ 📂tables_mixcr
  sequencing_report.csv
```
<br>

**alignment_reports**: Contains the alignment reports generated by mixcr with mixcr align.
 <br>

**assembly_reports**: Contains the assembly reports generated by mixcr with mixcr assemble.
 <br>

**clones_result**: Contains .clns files generated by mixcr. The pipeline supports in a basic way the creation mixcr plots. But you can customize them more by taking a look [here](https://mixcr.com/mixcr/reference/mixcr-exportPlots/).

**tables_mixcr**: These are the tables for all your samples in .tsv format. Mixcr generates these with mixcr exportClones. The pipeline uses these tables to create the *sequencing_report.csv*

If you have processed your data on a server you need to upload your data to the *PlotManager*. You need to do that by choosing the option 2 in the *PlotManager* and then you would choose 'your_experiment_name' in this case. You can also identify the target directory by the *sequencing_report.csv* which is located in the root of the directory of your experiment.
Finally, the pipeline automatically creates a copy of that folder in the pipeline's working directory. After that, you can start to work with your data.

## The Sequencing Report

The sequencing report contains the important information about your sequencing data. The corresponding file stored in the mentioned directory structure has not been trimmed. The pipeline uses this file to create an instance of it to be able to flexible trim the data on different inputs from the user. The sequencing report after trimming and preparation for the plots looks like the following: 


|    | Experiment     |   cloneId |   readCount | nSeqCDR3                                                     | aaSeqCDR3            |   lengthOfCDR3 |   cloneFraction |
|---:|:---------------|----------:|------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|---------------:|----------------:|
|  0 | random1_R1_001 |         0 |         572 | TGTAACGCAGTCCACTCTAGGTGGCAAGCTATGACCCGCTGG                   | CNAVHSRWQAMTRW       |             42 |       0.0530661 |
|  1 | random1_R1_001 |         1 |         345 | TGTATACAATCGGGAACGGATCGTAGG                                  | CIQSGTDRR            |             27 |       0.0320067 |
|  2 | random1_R1_001 |         2 |         320 | TGTAATGTAGATTTAACGGTGGTGGACGGTAGGCACCTTCCACGGGGCGACTACTGG    | CNVDLTVVDGRHLPRGDYW  |             57 |       0.0296874 |
|  3 | random1_R1_001 |         3 |         308 | TGTATACAATCGGGAACGAGTCGTAGG                                  | CIQSGTSRR            |             27 |       0.0285741 |
|  4 | random1_R1_001 |         4 |         297 | TGTCATGCCGACCTAAGAGTACGCGACGGGGTAAGGGGTGACTACTGG             | CHADLRVRDGVRGDYW     |             48 |       0.0275536 |
|  5 | random1_R1_001 |         5 |         292 | TGTAACGCAGTCCACTCTAGGTGGCAAGCTATGACCCACTGG                   | CNAVHSRWQAMTHW       |             42 |       0.0270897 |
|  6 | ... |         ... |         ... | ...                   | ...       |             ... |       ... |


**Experiment**: Contains the name of the sample for the given data
 <br>

**cloneId**: Is the id of the clone. The clone with the highest clone Fraction has cloneId=1
 <br>

**readCount**: Is the number of reads for the given clone
 <br>

**nSeqCDR3**: Is the nucleotide sequence of the CDR3 region
 <br>

**aaSeqCDR3**: Is the amino acid sequence of the CDR3 region
 <br>

**lengthOfCDR3**: Is the length of the nucleotide sequence
 <br>

**cloneFraction**: Is the fraction of the clone in the sample
 <br>

 This report contains all your samples, so if you open the report and scroll down you will see that your other experiments will follow in the Experiment column. You save the report as a variable and continue to work with it with: 

 ```python
 trimmed_report = plot.sequencing_report
 ```

 In contrast, the raw sequencing report contains more columns and more rows. For instace, if you sequenced multiple regions of the heavy chain, the corresponding data for these chains will be stored in the raw sequencing report. You can switch to these regions in the *PlotManager* by typing

 ```python
plot.change_preferred_region()
 ```

 For example if you took CDR1 region the PlotManager will pull the corresponding columns from the raw sequencing report and replace nSeqCDR3 and aaSeqCDR3 with the corresponding columns in the layout described above.

You can save the raw sequencing report as a variable with:

```python
raw_sequencing_report = plot.Report.origin_seq_report
```



